---
layout: post
title:  "Swapping the Contents of n Variables"
author: "Paul Keir"
category: C++ 
tags:
 - C++
 - folds
 - metaprogramming
---

C++11's `std::swap` is a binary function template which exchanges the contents of its two reference arguments. In C++20 `std::swap` will likely also permit execution at compile-time[^1]. In this post we consider a version which can swap the contents of an arbitrary number of arguments using a C++17 *fold-expression*.

An implementation for the non-array overload of `std::swap` is shown below. A simple `noexcept` specifier is also required, but this can come later.

```cpp
template <typename T>
constexpr void swap(T &t1, T &t2)
{
  T tmp = std::move(t1);
  t1 = std::move(t2);
  t2 = std::move(tmp);
}
```

A version of `swap` which takes *three* arguments can help to identify a recursive pattern. In `swap3`, below, a temporary variable `tmp` is declared, and initialised, by a *move assignment* to the first argument. This is followed by a move assignment, of each function (template) argument, to the argument which follows it. The update of the *last* argument is irregular, in that its move assignment is to the temporary variable; still holding the contents of the *first* argument. Nevertheless, a simple pattern of move assignments is observed; one for each argument:

```cpp
template <typename T>
constexpr void swap3(T &t1, T &t2, T &t3)
{
  T tmp = std::move(t1);
  t1 = std::move(t2);
  t2 = std::move(t3);
  t3 = std::move(tmp);
}
```

A general version can use variadic templates and a C++17 fold expression. The operator provided to a fold must be a binary function. Each of `swap3`'s move assignments involves *two* of `swap3`'s function (template) arguments; so a fold *can* be considered. The combining operation of a C++17 fold expression must though be an *operator*.

Of course there is no standard binary operator overload which will do anything like the move assignment we require. A simple class template container can be defined with a suitable binary operator; let's treat ourselves to `operator+`:

```cpp
template <typename T>
struct wrap {
  constexpr wrap operator+(wrap &&w) { x = std::move(w.x); return w; }
  T &x;
};
template <typename T> wrap(T) -> wrap<T>;
```

The operator's definition comprises a move assignment, and a return statement. The move assignment is reassuringly similar to those in `swap` or `swap3`, with the additional consideration to work on the `x` member of the two `wrap` objects involved.

The value returned by the operator will be required by the fold expression; just as `((0-1)-2)`[^2] "returns" the result of `(0-1)` as the minuend of the remaining subtraction expression. Let's demonstrate the `wrap` class in another version of a binary swap function:

```cpp
template <typename T>
constexpr void swap_op_1(T &t1, T &t2)
{
  T tmp = std::move(t1);
  wrap{t1} + wrap{t2};
  wrap{t2} + wrap{tmp};
}
```

As shown below (with optional parentheses) we can now also execute the two move assigments using a single expression:

```cpp
template <typename T>
constexpr void swap_op_2(T &t1, T &t2)
{
  T tmp = std::move(t1);
  (wrap{t1} + wrap{t2}) + wrap{tmp};
}
```

We have the type and operator for our fold expression; and a candidate using them is shown below. First of all, this will be a variadic function template, with a compulsory first parameter, allowing us to easily initialise the `tmp` temporary variable. This first parameter is also used to obtain a type parameter `T`, allowing `wrap` to be declared as a local, non-template, class; and with no need for a user-defined deduction guide. The fold expression presents one final hurdle, in that our function parameter pack `xs` includes neither the first argument, `x`; nor the last, `tmp`. Accordingly, a lambda function `c` is defined with a parameter pack; and called on the following line, with a pack expansion of `xs`, bracketed by `x` and `tmp`. The fold expression statement can then execute, as the entire body of the lambda function.


```cpp
template <typename T, typename ...Ts>
constexpr void swap(T &x, Ts &...xs)
{
  T tmp = std::move(x);
  struct wrap {
    constexpr wrap operator+(wrap &&w) { x = std::move(w.x); return w; }
    T &x;
  };
  auto c = [](auto &...xs) { (... + wrap{xs}); };
  c(x,xs...,tmp);
}
```

The final n-ary `swap` function template requires just a top and a tail. The type trait `std::enable_if_t` is used to specify the return type. Through use of `std::conjunction_v` and `std::is_same` we can ensure the function template is instantiated only when all of its arguments have the same type. The `noexcept` specifier is also added: lexically identical to that of the standard `std::swap`, this variadic version can assure us that no exceptions are thrown when variable templates `std::is_nothrow_move_constructible_v` and `std::is_nothrow_move_assignable_v` both instantiate as `true`, given the type of the first argument. In addition we are assured that this condition applies to all argument types, by our specification that they are all the same.


```cpp
template <typename T, typename ...Ts>
constexpr
std::enable_if_t<std::conjunction_v<std::is_same<T,Ts>...>>
swap(T &x, Ts &...xs)
noexcept (
  std::is_nothrow_move_constructible_v<T> &&
  std::is_nothrow_move_assignable_v<T>
)
{
  T tmp = std::move(x);
  struct wrap {
    constexpr wrap operator+(wrap &&w) { x = std::move(w.x); return w; }
    T &x;
  };
  auto c = [](auto &...xs) { (... + wrap{xs}); };
  c(x,xs...,tmp);
}
```

To accommodate generic code, a nullary overload of `swap` is also provided. A single argument is already supported in the code above. A Github repository is available [here](https://github.com/pkeir/nary-swap).

[^1]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2018/p0879r0.html
[^2]: Addition and subtraction in C++ have left-to-right associativity; so `(0-1-2)` will be parsed as `((0-1)-2)`; evaluating to `(-3)`. A left fold expression can achieve the same result: `[](auto ...xs){ return (... - xs); }(0,1,2)`.
