---
layout: post
title:  "C++20 Compile-time Metamath Proof Verification using C'est"
author: "Paul Keir"
category: C++ 
tags:
 - C++
 - constexpr
 - metaprogramming
 - Metamath
---

This post introduces [C'est](https://github.com/pkeir/cest), a non-standard
version of the C++20 standard library, with enhanced support for compile-time
evaluation. The C'est library is also shown applied to the porting of an
existing C++ [Metamath](http://us.metamath.org) database verifier for
compile-time execution. 

C++20 includes support for dynamic memory allocation within constant
expressions. GCC 10 and Clang 10 both support the feature, originally one of
seven proposals included under "Relaxations of constexpr restrictions":
[P1064](https://wg21.link/P1064), [P1002](https://wg21.link/P1002),
[P1327](https://wg21.link/P1327), [P1330](https://wg21.link/P1330),
[P1331](https://wg21.link/P1331), [P1668](https://wg21.link/P1668) and
[P0784](https://wg21.link/P0784). Of these, P0784 (More constexpr
containers), includes details on "constexpr new-expressions". The following
example demonstrates basic usage, and will compile and run with the
`-std=c++2a` flag (or `/std:c++latest` in MSVC):

```cpp
#include <cassert>
  
constexpr bool all_ok()
{
  int *p = new int{42};
  bool b = 42 == *p;
  delete p;

  return b;
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  assert(all_ok());
  static_assert(all_ok());

  return 0;
}
```

Of course, many parts of C++ are still unavailable within constant expressions:
variables of non-literal type; `static` variables in `constexpr` functions;
`reinterpret_cast`; an invocation of a non-`constexpr` function; to list just a
few. Nevertheless, the inclusion of dynamic memory allocation in constant
expressions fires the imagination and feels like a step change. Complex
compile-time programs can be less ad-hoc, ornate and fragile. The opportunity
presents itself to port substantial, pre-existing, idiomatic C++ programs for
execution at compile-time.

The movement is somehow reminiscent of the introduction of NVIDIA's CUDA. In 2007 CUDA allowed developers with less focus on graphics programming and shaders to use C/C++ code on GPUs. C++20 similarly allows those averse to template metaprogramming an avenue to transport realistic C++ programs, with loops, lambdas, new-expressions, etc., to the realm of compile-time execution. There is furthermore a similar requirement for deft syntactic placement of function specifiers: just as `__device__` is required with CUDA, or `__restrict(amp)` with C++AMP, so is `constexpr` required in C++20. In contrast, Khronos SYCL requires no such annotations.

As more language components are permitted within constant expressions, so
support broadens within the standard library. For example, all methods of
`std::array` are `constexpr`; as are most function templates within the
standard algorithms library. The following C++20 program will compile in GCC/Clang:

```cpp
#include <array>
#include <algorithm>
#include <functional>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  using namespace std; 
  static_assert(3==*for_each_n(begin(array{3,2,1}), 0, negate{}));
  return 0;
}
```

Thanks to Louis Dionne's adopted proposals [P0980](https://wg21.link/P0980) and
[P1004](https://wg21.link/P1004), C++20's support for dynamic memory allocation
within constant expressions enables `constexpr` functionality for the venerable
`std::vector` and `std::string` of the standard library. Alas, neither is yet
available in libstdc++, libc++, or Microsoft's STL. Regardless, assuming a
package has a dependency on the standard library, it is as likely to rely on
other containers and objects; for example `std::list`, `std::deque`,
`std::map`, `std::unique_ptr` and `std::cout`. Given the many compile-time
features now available at the language level, must we wait for C++2b before
experimenting with larger compile-time programs?

In considering wider compile-time support for the C++ standard library,
it is worth pausing to emphasise something that will *not* be possible, even
when [P0980](https://wg21.link/P0980) and [P1004](https://wg21.link/P1004) *do*
have implementation support. The code below shows three top-level `constexpr`
declaration attempts; each will fail to compile in C++20.
[P0784](https://wg21.link/P0784) allows only for *transient constexpr
allocations* (fleeting, perhaps?): memory allocated within a constant
expression must be de-allocated by the end of it.  While the first of these,
the `double` pointer `p`, makes this especially clear, each suffers from the
same failing: `constexpr` memory allocated within each constant expression is
not de-allocated. Values calculated using dynamic allocation can for now be
saved into statically sized types, such as `std::array`; while the `propconst`
qualifier of [P1974](https://wg21.link/P1974) may provide a solution for C++23.

```cpp
#include <vector.hpp>
#include <string.hpp>

constexpr double *p = new double{0.577215};
constexpr std::vector v{0,1,1,2,3,5,8};
constexpr std::string str = "rosebud";
```

A number of standard library containers must distinguish memory
allocation from value construction. Helpfully, all methods of the default
*Allocator*, `std::allocator`, are qualified as `constexpr` in C++20.
Nevertheless, an additional concern for compile-time container implementations
does arise.  [P0593](https://wg21.link/P0593) was also adopted in C++20, and
introduces the notion of *implicit lifetime types*. Feral, idiomatic codes
commonly use values of such elementary
types as soon as the memory has been allocated; i.e. without a
constructor call. This is now *defined* behaviour in C++20 *runtime*
programs ... but not within constant expressions; where it will produce a
compilation error. Consequently, a call to `std::construct_at` (or
`std::allocator_traits<Alloc>::construct`) is necessary; a [placement
new](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/new#Placement_new) expression
is not an option as only
[*replaceable*](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/new/operator_new#Global_replacements)
(global) allocation functions can be used within constant expressions.  A
destructor call (via `std::destroy_at`) remains optional; destruction of a
value with an implicit lifetime type executes no code, but does formally end
its lifetime. The following code correctly constructs the 4th array element
before writing to it:

```cpp
#include <memory>

constexpr void alloc_ok()
{
  std::allocator<int> alloc;
  int *p = alloc.allocate(4);

  std::construct_at(&p[3]);
  p[3] = 42;

  alloc.deallocate(p,4);
}
```

Many common C++ programming idioms, including those within container
implementations, require equality comparison of memory addresses.  Alas, GCC
produces a compilation error when comparing addresses from separate allocations
within a constant expression. GCC's `__builtin_constant_p` predicate determines
if its argument is constant at compile-time. Comparing two pointers, of
compatible types, within a constant expression is only problematic for GCC when
they come from separate allocations. But, as they come from separate
allocations, we *know* that their address values should not be equal; and
`__builtin_constant_p` can spot this.  Consequently, an equality function
template can be defined.  The operators of built-in types, including pointers,
cannot be overloaded; so `operator==` is not an option.  The C'est library does
not in fact go down this road; and is consequently only compatible with Clang.
The code below illustrates the idea anyway.

```cpp
#include <cassert>
#include <type_traits>

template <typename T>
constexpr bool equal_to(const T& lhs, const T& rhs)
{
  if constexpr (!std::is_pointer_v<T>)
    return lhs==rhs;

  if (std::is_constant_evaluated() && !__builtin_constant_p(lhs==rhs))
    return false;

  return lhs==rhs;
}

constexpr void ptr_compare()
{
  int *p1 = new int{17}, *p2 = new int{17};

#ifdef __clang__
  assert(p1!=p2);
#else
  assert(!equal_to(p1,p2));
#endif

  delete p1, delete p2;    
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  assert((ptr_compare(),true));
  static_assert((ptr_compare(),true));

  return 0;
}
```

So then, the C'est project aims to provide a non-standard version of the C++
standard library, with enhanced support for compile time evaluation, for use in
research.  Header files in C'est are named after those in the standard library:
where there was `#include <vector>`, with C'est we have `#include
"cest/vector.hpp"`.  Classes and objects from the C'est library reside within
the `cest` namespace; and consequently usage such as `std::deque` would become
`cest::deque`. The C'est library has incomplete support for the following class
templates and containers: `vector`, `string`, `forward_list`, `list`, `set`,
`map`, `queue`, `deque`, `istringstream`, `unique_ptr` and `complex`. Given a
`constexpr` container, most function templates from the algorithm and numeric
libraries can now also be used within a constant expression. To simplify the
porting of existing codes `cout`, `cerr` and associated streaming operators are
also available; currently they do nothing at compile time, while at runtime
they behave as usual. Please visit the repository at
[https://github.com/pkeir/cest](https://github.com/pkeir/cest) and give it
a whirl.

[Metamath](http://us.metamath.org) is a formal language for the specification
of mathematical proofs, accompanied by a program for their verification and
analysis. The Metamath website lists over a dozen proof verifiers. The C++
version listed there,
[checkmm.cpp](http://us.metamath.org/other.html#checkmm) is written by Eric
Schmidt, and presented a tempting and pragmatic goal as a port for compile time
execution. The C++ source code is a single 1400-line C++ file, with the C++
standard library its only dependency; it uses the `queue`, `string`, `set`,
`deque`, `vector`, `pair` and `map` containers; the algorithm library's
`set_intersection` and `find`; as well as `cout`, `cerr` and `operator<<`.
Having completed the port, the following code will compile with no error;
indicating that the snippet of Metamath included, a declaration of 9 constant
symbols, is valid.  Removing the dollar sign from the `$c` constant symbol
keyword is enough to introduce a compilation error.

```cpp
#include "ctcheckmm.hpp"

constexpr int basic_checkmm_test()
{
  checkmm app;
  cest::string txt = R"($c 0 + = -> ( ) term wff |- $.)";
  return app.run("", txt);
}

static_assert(EXIT_SUCCESS == basic_checkmm_test());
```

Changes to the original C++ code naturally began with the addition of
the `constexpr` qualifier to all functions. With `static` data
prohibited in `constexpr` functions, a simple class was introduced to allow
the `static` data to exist instead as a non-static data member; existing functions became its members. Of course,
within the constant expression, input no longer comes from a Metamath file read
at runtime; instead a `string` is initialised, and so too an `istringstream`, as
the argument for an unchanged `nexttoken(istream&)` function;
meanwhile at runtime, the program still constructs an `ifstream`.  Until
`std::embed` of [P1040](https://wg21.link/P1040) is adopted, a `#include`
directive is used to initialise a `string` based on the contents of
the file indicated by a magic `MMFILEPATH` preprocessor token.
Compile-time verification of larger Metamath databases can take
some time, and it is simplest to set Clang's `-fconstexpr-steps`
parameter to the maximum possible value of `2147483647`.
The final program is configured to compile-time verify the file specified
by `MMFILEPATH`; while still accepting a file path at runtime via `argv[1]`.
A suitable compilation command is:
`clang++ -std=c++2a -fconstexpr-steps=2147483647 -I $CEST_INCLUDE main.cpp -DMMFILEPATH=peano.mm.raw`.

```cpp
#include "ctcheckmm.hpp"

#define xstr(s) str(s)
#define str(s) #s

constexpr int run_checkmm()
{
  checkmm app;

#ifdef MMFILEPATH
  cest::string txt =
#include xstr(MMFILEPATH)
;
  return app.run("", txt);
#else
  return EXIT_SUCCESS;
#endif
}

int main(int argc, char ** argv)
{
  if (argc != 2)
  {
    ns::cerr << "Syntax: checkmm <filename>" << ns::endl;
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
  }

  static_assert(EXIT_SUCCESS == run_checkmm());

  checkmm app;
  int ret = app.run(argv[1]);

  return ret;
}
```

The repository for the C'est library is at
[https://github.com/pkeir/cest](https://github.com/pkeir/cest).  For ctcheckmm,
the compile-time Metamath database verifier which uses C'est, see
[https://github.com/pkeir/ctcheckmm](https://github.com/pkeir/ctcheckmm).  The
C'est project features contributions from Andrew Gozillon of the University of
the West of Scotland; and Jules Penuchot of Université Paris-Saclay.
Additional help from Hossein Haeri of Université Catholique de Louvain is
gratefully received.

